Programming Journey:

We got in touch with the expyriment package initially in the course and it awoke our interest to 
get acquainted with the means of it more so we decided to submit our final project as a python-based 
online experiment. Additionally to the documentation in the courseware there was a big pool of material 
concerning expyriment on the internet and it was quite pleasant to work out the functionality and the 
available functions. We watched instructing videos and read through online documentations provided by 
several sources and that way got acquainted with the package. We then felt equipped with all the required 
knowledge to start off with the implementation. Then it was time to really dive deep into the experiment 
and to grasp all its details and design choices in order to successfully replicate it. Since the experiment 
was well-known by all of us, that step didn’t take much time and we could cover this chapter by simply 
reactivating our memories and discussing it again in the group.
The first real challenge was the installation of the package which was a little bit tricky but luckily 
we could solve these initial problems easily. We then opened a GitHub repository so that we could access 
the most recent version at all times. 
Going deeper into the experiment we increasingly had to face smaller inconveniences since not all functions 
were so easy to grasp and some details of the experiment were difficult to adjust to match our ideas. Since there 
was already a python-based implementation of the „Simon Task“ available on the internet we brainstormed a lot what 
about the design we could change in order to improve the experiment. 
Adjustments were made in the color choice because we imagined that the red targets in the experiment at hand were 
introducing unjustifiable biases since red is a signal color and evolutionary-conditioned processed faster. We instead 
decided to take blue and green stimuli since these two colors are still well-distinct but more similar in terms of general 
processing speed. Further we changed the design in respect to the trials and introduced practice trails in order to reduce 
biases that origin from initial uncertainty about the task. The third big design feature we changed, is the amount of conditions. 
By introducing a baseline condition that measures the general reaction time of each participant, we aimed at outlining more 
precisely the differences between reaction latencies that stem from the general processing speed and the ones that actually are 
caused by the different conditions. The baseline condition was held very neutral in white with a central key to press. 
Smaller adjustments were made in the instructions in order to make them more comprehensible and the general outlook of the 
experiment. We additionally introduced a fixation plus to prepare the participant for the onset of the stimulus.
Implementation-wise we stumbled over the randomization of the stimulus onset which we set to 350ms - 1200ms and several technical 
challenges. For example it was difficult to end up with the right amount of trials per block and the exclusivity of the keys, meaning 
that only the respective keys allow the participant to progress in the experiment and that a simple messy running over all keys would 
not make the experiment end faster. It was also challenging to determine that only the space bar and the enter key are to be pressed 
in order to skip.
After we had successfully implemented the experiment we started focusing onto the data analysis and the plotting of the collected 
data and expanded our knowledge by Scipy, Pandas and Seaborn. We eventually also got to use familiar packages like Random, Matplot and Numpy. 
Also for these packages the internet was well prepared in order to educate us and we tried several different functions to clean the data 
and get exactly the outcome we wanted to plot later on. We decided to compare means and standard deviations and plot the different conditions 
against each other. This way we wanted to really show visually that the „Simon Effect“ is still replicable even with more modern technical 
means compared to the original experiment.
